1G (first-generation mobile telecommunications): Started in 1980s using analog signals to provide voice transmission service. 
2G (second-generation mobile telecommunications): Started in the 1990s using digital radio signals. 
3D printer: A printer that creates objects by adding layers of material onto one another. 
Also known as additive manufacturing. 
3D scanner: Scanner that uses lasers, cameras, or robotic arms to record the shape of an object. 
3G (third-generation mobile telecommunications): Started in the 2000s and provided services capable of effective connectivity to the Internet, marking the beginning of smartphones. 
3GLs (third-generation languages): High-level procedural language. 
See also Procedural language. 
4G (fourth-generation mobile telecommunications):  Replacing 3G networks in some areas with providers using WiMax and LTE connections to provide faster transmission speeds. 
4GLs (fourth-generation languages): Very high level or problem-oriented languages. 
See also Task-oriented language. 
5GLs (fifth-generation languages): See Fifth-generation language. 
802.11: See Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity). 
a AC adapter: Notebook computers use AC adapters that are typically outside the system unit. 
They plug into a standard wall outlet, convert AC to DC, provide power to drive the system components, and can recharge batteries. 
Access: Refers to the responsibility of those who have data to control who is able to use that data. 
Access speed: Measures the amount of time required by the storage device to retrieve data and programs. 
Accounting: The organizational department that records all financial activity from billing customers to paying employees. 
Accounts payable: The activity that shows the money a company owes to its suppliers for the materials and services it has received. 
Accounts receivable: The activity that shows what money has been received or is owed by customers. 
Accuracy: Relates to the responsibility of those who collect data to ensure that the data is correct. 
Active display area: The diagonal length of a monitor’s viewing area. 
Activity tracker: A wearable computer that typically monitors daily exercise and sleep patterns. 
Additive manufacturing: See 3D printer. 
Address: Located in the header of an e-mail message; the e-mail address of the persons sending, receiving, and, optionally, anyone else who is to receive copies. 
Advanced Research Project Agency Network (ARPANET):  A national computer network from which the Internet developed. 
Agile development: A development methodology that starts by getting core functionality of a program working, then expands on it until the customer is satisfied with the results. 
AJAX: An advanced use of JavaScript found on many interactive sites. 
This technology is used to create interactive websites that respond quickly like traditional desktop application software. 
All-in-one: A desktop computer that has the monitor and system unit housed together in the same case (e.g., Apple’s iMac). 
Analog: Continuous signals that vary to represent different tones, pitches, and volume. 
Analog signals: Signals that represent a range of frequencies, such as the human voice. 
They are a continuous electronic wave signal as opposed to a digital signal that is either on or off. 
Android: Mobile operating system originally developed by Android Inc. 
and later purchased by Google. 
Antispyware: See Spy removal programs. 
Antivirus program: A utility program that guards a computer system from viruses or other damaging programs. 
App: See Application software. 
App store: A website that provides access to specific mobile apps that can be downloaded either for a nominal fee or free of charge. 
Applets: Web pages contain links to programs called applets, which are written in a programming language called Java. 
These programs are used to add interest to a website by presenting animation, displaying graphics, providing interactive games, and so forth. 
Application generation subsystem: Provides tools to create data entry forms and specialized programming languages that interface or work with common languages, such as C or Visual Basic. 
Application generator: Also called program coder; provides modules of prewritten code to accomplish various tasks, such as calculation of overtime pay. 
Application software: Also referred to as apps. 
Software that can perform useful work, such as word processing, cost estimating, or accounting tasks. 
The user primarily interacts with application software. 
Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU): The part of the CPU that performs arithmetic and logical operations. 
Arithmetic operation: Fundamental math operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. 
Glossary Final PDF to printer 376 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 376 12/02/15 02:32 PM BD (Blu-ray disc): A type of high-definition disc with a capacity of 25 to 50 gigabytes. 
Beta testing: Testing by a select group of potential users in the final stage of testing a program. 
Big data: Term given to describe the ever-growing volume of data currently being collected. 
Binary system: Numbering system in which all numbers consist of only two digits: 0 and 1. 
Biometric scanning: Devices that check fingerprints or retinal scans. 
BIOS (basic input/output system): Information including the specifics concerning the amount of RAM and the type of keyboard, mouse, and secondary storage devices connected to the system unit. 
Bit (binary digit): Each 1 or 0 is a bit; short for binary digit. 
Bitmap image: Graphic file in which an image is made up of thousands of dots (pixels). 
BitTorrent: A peer-to-peer file-sharing protocol used for distributing large amounts of data over the Internet. 
Blog: See Web log. 
Bluetooth: A wireless technology that allows nearby devices to communicate without the connection of cables or telephone systems. 
Booting: Starting or restarting your computer. 
Botnet: A collection of zombie computers. 
Broadband: Bandwidth that includes microwave, satellite, coaxial cable, and fiber-optic channels. 
It is used for very-highspeed computers. 
Browser: Special Internet software connecting you to remote computers; opens and transfers files, displays text and images, and provides an uncomplicated interface to the Internet and web documents. 
Examples of browsers are Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, and Google Chrome. 
Browser cache: A collection of temporary Internet files that contain web page content and instructions for displaying this content. 
Bus: All communication travels along a common connecting cable called a bus or a backbone. 
As information passes along the bus, it is examined by each device on the system board to see if the information is intended for that device. 
See also Bus line and Ethernet. 
Bus line: Electronic data roadway, along which bits travel; connects the parts of the CPU to each other and links the CPU with other important hardware. 
The common connecting cable in a bus network. 
Bus network: Each device is connected to a common cable called a bus or backbone, and all communications travel along this bus. 
Bus width: The number of bits traveling simultaneously down a bus is the bus width. 
Business suite: See Productivity suites. 
Business-to-business (B2B): A type of electronic commerce that involves the sale of a product or service from one business to another. 
This is typically a manufacturer-supplier relationship. 
Business-to-consumer (B2C): A type of electronic commerce that involves the sale of a product or service to the general public or end users. 
Artificial intelligence (AI): A field of computer science that attempts to develop computer systems that can mimic or simulate human thought processes and actions. 
Artificial reality: See Virtual reality. 
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange): Binary coding scheme widely used on all computers, including personal computers. 
Eight bits form each byte, and each byte represents one character. 
Aspect ratio: The width of a monitor divided by its height. 
Common aspect ratios for monitors are 4:3 (standard) and 16:9 (wide screen). 
Assembly language: A step up from machine language, using names instead of numbers. 
These languages use abbreviations or mnemonics, such as ADD, that are automatically converted to the appropriate sequence of 1s and 0s. 
Asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL): One of the most widely used types of telephone high-speed connections (DSL). 
Attachment: A file, such as a document or worksheet, that is attached to an e-mail message. 
Attribute: A data field represents an attribute (description or characteristic) of some entity (person, place, thing, or object). 
For example, an employee is an entity with many attributes, including his or her last name, address, phone, etc. 
Automated design tool: Software package that evaluates hardware and software alternatives according to requirements given by the systems analyst. 
Also called computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools. 
b Backbone: See Bus. 
Background: Other programs running simultaneously with the program being used in an operating system. 
See also Foreground. 
Backup: A Windows utility program. 
See Backup program. 
Backup program: A utility program that helps protect you from the effects of a disk failure by making a copy of selected or all files that have been saved onto a disk. 
Balance sheet: Lists the overall financial condition of an organization. 
Bandwidth: Bandwidth determines how much information can be transmitted at one time. 
It is a measurement of the communication channel’s capacity. 
There are three bandwidths: voice band, medium band, and broadband. 
Bar code: Code consisting of vertical zebra-striped marks printed on product containers, read with a bar code reader. 
Bar code reader: Photoelectric scanner that reads bar codes for processing. 
Bar code scanner: See Bar code reader. 
Base station: See Wireless access point. 
Baseband: Bandwidth used to connect individual computers that are located close to one another. 
Though it supports high-speed transmission, it can only carry a single signal at a time. 
Batch processing: Processing performed all at once on data that has been collected over time. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 377 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 377 12/02/15 02:32 PM Character: A single letter, number, or special character, such as a punctuation mark or $. 
Character encoding standards: Assign unique sequence of bits to each character. 
Child node: A node one level below the node being considered in a hierarchical database or network. 
See also Parent node. 
Chip: A tiny circuit board etched on a small square of sandlike material called silicon. 
A chip is also called a silicon chip, semiconductor, or integrated circuit. 
Chip carrier: The device onto which chips are mounted and plugged into the system board. 
Chrome OS: An operating system designed by Google for netbook computers and Internet connectivity through cloud computing. 
Circles: A service offered through Google Plus, for grouping individuals according to common interests or other criteria. 
Clarity: Indicated by the resolution, or number of pixels, on a monitor. 
The greater the resolution, the better the clarity. 
Class: In an object-oriented database, classes are similar objects grouped together. 
Client: A node that requests and uses resources available from other nodes. 
Typically, a client is a user’s personal computer. 
Client-based e-mail system: A system that requires a special program known as an e-mail client to be installed on your computer. 
Client/server network: Network in which one powerful computer coordinates and supplies services to all other nodes on the network. 
Server nodes coordinate and supply specialized services, and client nodes request the services. 
Clock speed: Also called clock rate. 
It is measured in gigahertz, or billions of beats per second. 
The faster the clock speed, the faster the computer can process information and execute instructions. 
Cloud computing: Data stored at a server on the Internet and available anywhere the Internet can be accessed. 
Cloud printer: A printer connected to the Internet that provides printing services to others on the Internet. 
Cloud storage: Also known as online storage. 
An Internetbased space for storing data and files. 
Cloud suite: Suite stored at a server on the Internet and available anywhere from the Internet. 
Coaxial cable: High-frequency transmission cable that replaces the multiple wires of telephone lines with a single solid-copper core. 
It is used to deliver television signals as well as to connect computers in a network. 
Code: Writing a program using the appropriate computer language. 
Code review: See Desk checking. 
Coding: Actual writing of a computer program, using a programming language. 
Cold boot: Starting the computer after it has been turned off. 
Combination key: Keys such as the Ctrl key that perform an action when held down in combination with another key. 
Commercial database: Enormous database an organization develops to cover certain particular subjects. 
Access to this type of database is usually offered for a fee or subscription. 
Also known as data bank and informational utility. 
Button: A special area you can click to make links that “navigate” through a presentation. 
Byte: Unit consisting of eight bits. 
There are 256 possible bit combinations in a byte, and each byte represents one character. 
c Cable: Cords used to connect input and output devices to the system unit. 
Cable modem: Type of modem that uses coaxial cable to create high-speed computer connections. 
Cable service: Service provided by cable television companies using existing television cables. 
Cache memory: Area of random-access memory (RAM) set aside to store the most frequently accessed information. 
Cache memory improves processing by acting as a temporary highspeed holding area between memory and the CPU, allowing the computer to detect which information in RAM is most frequently used. 
Capacity: Capacity is how much data a particular storage medium can hold and is another characteristic of secondary storage. 
Card reader: A device that interprets the encoded information contained on credit, debit, access, and identification cards. 
Carpal tunnel syndrome: A repetitive strain injury consisting of damage to the nerves and tendons in the hands. 
Cascading style sheets (CSS): Files inserted into an HTML document that control the appearance of web pages including layout, colors, and fonts. 
CD: See Compact disc. 
CD-R: Stands for CD-recordable. 
This optical disc can be written to only once. 
After that it can be read many times without deterioration but cannot be written on or erased. 
Used to create custom music CDs and to archive data. 
CD-ROM (compact disc–read-only memory): CD format that allows data to be read but not recorded. 
Used to distribute large databases, references, and software application packages. 
CD-RW (compact disc rewritable): A reusable, optical disc that is not permanently altered when data is recorded. 
Used to create and edit large multimedia presentations. 
Cell: The space created by the intersection of a vertical column and a horizontal row within a worksheet in a program like Microsoft Excel. 
A cell can contain text or numeric entries. 
Cell tower: Antennae that support cellular communication. 
Cellular: Type of wireless connection that uses multiple antennae (cell towers) to send and receive data within relatively small geographic regions (cells). 
Cellular service provider: Supports voice and data transmission to wireless devices. 
Central processing unit (CPU): The part of the computer that holds data and program instructions for processing the data. 
The CPU consists of the control unit and the arithmetic-logic unit. 
In a personal computer, the CPU is on a single electronic component called a microprocessor chip. 
Final PDF to printer 378 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 378 12/02/15 02:32 PM Contrast ratio: Indicates a monitor’s ability to display colors. 
It compares the light intensity of the brightest white to the darkest black. 
Control unit: Section of the CPU that tells the rest of the computer how to carry out program instructions. 
Conversion: Also known as systems implementation; four approaches to conversion: direct, parallel, pilot, and phased. 
See also Systems implementation. 
Cookies: Small data files that are deposited on your hard disk from websites you have visited. 
Coprocessor: Specialized processing chip designed to improve specific computer operations, such as the graphics coprocessor. 
Copyright: A legal concept that gives content creators the right to control use and distribution of their work. 
Cordless mouse: A battery-powered mouse that typically uses radio waves or infrared light waves to communicate with the system unit. 
Also known as wireless mouse. 
Cortana: A digital assistant that accepts commands through text or speech. 
Introduced in 2015 as a part of Windows 10. 
Cracker: One who gains unauthorized access to a computer system for malicious purposes. 
Curved monitor: Uses similar technology as flat panel monitors except it has a concave screen that provides better viewing angles near the edges of the screen. 
Cyberbullying: The use of the Internet, a cell phone, or other device to deliver content intended to hurt or embarrass another person. 
Cybercash: See Digital cash. 
Cybercrime: Any criminal offense that involves a computer and a network. 
Criminals may be employees, outside users, hackers and crackers, or organized crime members. 
Cylinder: Hard disks store and organize files using tracks, sectors, and cylinders. 
A cylinder runs through each track of a stack of platters. 
Cylinders differentiate files stored on the same track and sector of different platters. 
d Data: Raw, unprocessed facts that are input to a computer system that will give compiled information when the computer processes those facts. 
Data is also defined as facts or observations about people, places, things, and events. 
Data administration subsystem: Helps manage the overall database, including maintaining security, providing disaster recovery support, and monitoring the overall performance of database operations. 
Data bank: See Commercial database. 
Data cube: A multidimensional data model. 
See also Multidimensional database. 
Data definition subsystem: This system defines the logical structure of the database by using a data dictionary. 
Data dictionary: Dictionary containing a description of the structure of data in a database. 
Data flow diagram: Diagram showing data or information flow within an information system. 
Data integrity: Database characteristics relating to the consistency and accuracy of data. 
Common data item: In a relational database, all related tables must have a common data item or key field. 
Communication channel: The actual connecting medium that carries the message between sending and receiving devices. 
This medium can be a physical wire, cable, or wireless connection. 
Communication device: Computer systems that communicate with other computer systems using modems. 
For example, it modifies computer output into a form that can be transmitted across standard telephone lines. 
Communication system: Electronic system that transmits data over communication lines from one location to another. 
Compact disc (CD): Widely used optical disc format. 
It holds 650 MB (megabytes) to 1 GB (gigabyte) of data on one side of the CD. 
Compact disc–read-only memory: See CD-ROM. 
Compact disc rewritable: See CD-RW. 
Company database: Also called shared database. 
Stored on a mainframe, users throughout the company have access to the database through their personal computers linked by a network. 
Compiler: Software that converts the programmer’s procedural language program (source code) into machine language (object code). 
This object code can then be saved and run later. 
Computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/ CAM) system: Knowledge work systems that run programs to integrate the design and manufacturing activities. 
CAD/CAM is widely used in manufacturing automobiles. 
Computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tool: A type of software development tool that helps provide some automation and assistance in program design, coding, and testing. 
See also Automated design tool. 
Computer crime: See Cybercrime. 
Computer ethics: Guidelines for the morally acceptable use of computers in our society. 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act: Law allowing prosecution of unauthorized access to computers and databases. 
Computer monitoring software: The most invasive and dangerous type of spyware. 
These programs record every activity made on your computer, including credit card numbers, bank account numbers, and e-mail messages. 
Computer network: Communications system connecting two or more computers and their peripheral devices to exchange information and share resources. 
Computer support specialist: Specialists include technical writers, computer trainers, computer technicians, and help-desk specialists who provide technical support to customers and other users. 
Computer technician: Specialist who installs hardware and software and troubleshoots problems for users. 
Connectivity: Capability of the personal computer to use information from the world beyond one’s desk. 
Data and information can be sent over telephone or cable lines and through the air so that computers can talk to each other and share information. 
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C): A type of electronic commerce that involves individuals selling to individuals. 
Contextual tab: A type of tab found in Microsoft Word that appears only when needed and anticipates the next operations to be performed by the user. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 379 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 379 12/02/15 02:32 PM Denial of service (DoS) attack: A variant virus in which websites are overwhelmed with data and users are unable to access the website. 
Unlike a worm that self-replicates, a DoS attack floods a computer or network with requests for information and data. 
Density: Refers to how tightly the bits (electromagnetic charges) can be packed next to one another on a disk. 
Desk checking: Process of checking out a computer program by studying a printout of the program line by line, looking for syntax and logic errors. 
Desktop: (1) The screen that is displayed on the monitor when the computer starts up. 
All items and icons on the screen are considered to be on your desktop and are used to interact with the computer. 
(2) A system unit that typically contains the system’s electronic components and selected secondary storage devices. 
Input and output devices, such as the mouse, keyboard, and monitor, are located outside the system unit. 
Desktop computer: Computer small enough to fit on top of or along the side of a desk and yet too big to carry around. 
Desktop operating system: See Stand-alone operating system. 
Desktop publisher: One who creates and formats publicationready material. 
Desktop publishing program: Program that allows you to mix text and graphics to create publications of professional quality. 
Device driver: Every device that is connected to the computer has a special program associated with it called a device driver that allows communication between the operating system and the device. 
Diagnostic program: See Troubleshooting program. 
Dial-up service: Antiquated method of connecting to the Internet using telephones and telephone modems, which has been replaced with higher-speed connection services. 
Dialog box: Provides additional information and requests user input. 
Dictionary attack: Uses software to try thousands of common words sequentially in an attempt to gain unauthorized access to a user’s account. 
Digital: Computers are digital machines because they can only understand 1s and 0s. 
For example, a digital watch states the exact time on the face, whereas an analog watch has the second hand moving in constant motion as it tells the time. 
Digital camera: Similar to a traditional camera except that images are recorded digitally in the camera’s memory rather than on film. 
Digital cash: Currency for Internet purchases. 
Buyers purchase digital cash from a third party (a bank that specializes in electronic currency) by transferring funds from their banks. 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act: Law that makes it legal for a program owner to make only his or her own backup copies of a software program. 
However, it is illegal for those copies to be resold or given away. 
Digital projector: A type of monitor that projects images from a traditional monitor onto a screen or wall. 
Digital rights management (DRM): Encompasses various technologies that control access to electronic media and files. 
Data maintenance: Maintaining data includes adding new data, deleting old data, and editing existing data. 
Data manipulation subsystem: Provides tools to maintain and analyze data. 
Data mining: Technique of searching data warehouses for related information and patterns. 
Data processing system (DPS): Transaction processing system that keeps track of routine operations and records these events in a database. 
Also called transaction processing system (TPS). 
Data redundancy: A common database problem in which data is duplicated and stored in different files. 
Data security: Protection of software and data from unauthorized tampering or damage. 
Data warehouse: Data collected from a variety of internal and external databases and stored in a database called a data warehouse. 
Data mining is then used to search these databases. 
Data worker: Person involved with the distribution and communication of information, such as administrative assistants and clerks. 
Database: A collection of related information, like employee names, addresses, and phone numbers. 
It is organized so that a computer program can quickly select the desired pieces of information and display them for you. 
Database administrator (DBA): Uses database management software to determine the most efficient way to organize and access data. 
Database file: File containing highly structured and organized data created by database management programs. 
Database management system (DBMS): To organize, manage, and retrieve data. 
DBMS programs have five subsystems: DBMS engine, data definition, data manipulation, applications generation, and data administration. 
An example of a database management system is Microsoft Access. 
See also Database manager. 
Database manager: Software package used to set up, or structure, a database such as an inventory list of supplies. 
It also provides tools to edit, enter, and retrieve data from the database. 
Database model: Defines rules and standards for all data in a database. 
There are five database models: hierarchical, network, relational, multidimensional, and object-oriented. 
For example, Access uses the relational data model. 
DBMS engine: Provides a bridge between the logical view of data and the physical view of data. 
Debugging: Programmer’s word for testing and then eliminating errors in a program. 
Programming errors are of two types: syntax and logic errors. 
Decision model: The decision model gives the decision support system its analytical capabilities. 
There are three types of models included in the decision model: tactical, operational, and strategic. 
Decision support system (DSS): Flexible analysis tool that helps managers make decisions about unstructured problems, such as effects of events and trends outside the organization. 
Demand report: A demand report is produced on request. 
An example is a report on the numbers and types of jobs held by women and minorities done at the request of the government. 
Demodulation: Process performed by a modem in converting analog signals to digital signals. 
Final PDF to printer 380 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 380 12/02/15 02:32 PM Domain name server (DNS): Internet addressing method that assigns names and numbers to people and computers. 
Because the numeric IP addresses are difficult to remember, the DNS server was developed to automatically convert text-based addresses to numeric IP addresses. 
Dot pitch: Distance between each pixel. 
The lower the dot pitch, the shorter the distance between pixels, and the higher the clarity of images produced. 
Dots per inch (dpi): Printer resolution is measured in dpi. 
The higher the dpi, the better the quality of images produced. 
Downlink: To receive data from a satellite. 
Downloading: Process of transferring information from a remote computer to the computer one is using. 
Drawing program: Program used to help create artwork for publications. 
See also Illustration program. 
Driver: See Device driver. 
Drones: Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) that act as an output device, sending back video and sound to the user. 
DS3: Provides support for very high speed, all-digital transmission for large corporations. 
DSL: See Digital subscriber line. 
Duplex printing: Allows automatic printing on both sides of a sheet of paper. 
DVD (digital versatile disc or digital video disc): Similar to CD-ROMs except that more data can be packed into the same amount of space. 
DVD drives can store a typical capacity of 4.7 GB on one side. 
DVI (Digital Video Interface) port: A type of port that provides a connection to a digital monitor. 
e E-book: See E-book reader. 
E-book reader: Handheld, book-sized device that displays text and graphics. 
Using content downloaded from the web or special cartridges, these devices are used to read newspapers, magazines, and books. 
E-commerce: Buying and selling goods over the Internet. 
E-ink: A black-and-white output from some e-book readers producing images that reflect light like ordinary paper. 
E-learning: A web application that allows one to take educational courses online. 
E-mail: Allows you to communicate with anyone in the world who has an Internet address or e-mail account with a system connected to the Internet. 
You can include a text message, graphics, photos, and file attachments. 
E-mail client: A special program that communicates with the e-mail service provider and must be installed on the computer first. 
E-reader: Dedicated mobile devices for storing and displaying e-books and other electronic media including electronic newspapers and magazines. 
EBCDIC (Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code):  Binary coding scheme that is a standard for minicomputers and mainframe computers. 
Economic feasibility: Comparing the costs of a new system to the benefits it promises. 
Digital signal: Computers can only understand digital signals. 
Before processing can occur within the system unit, a conversion must occur from what we understand (analog) to what the system unit can electronically process (digital). 
See also Analog signals. 
Digital subscriber line (DSL): Provides high-speed connection using existing telephone lines. 
Digital subscriber line (DSL) service: Service provided by telephone companies using existing telephone lines to provide high-speed connections. 
Digital versatile disc (DVD): A type of optical disc similar to CD-ROMs except that more data can be packed into the same amount of space. 
See also DVD (digital versatile disc). 
Digital video disc: See DVD (digital versatile disc). 
Digital wallet: Information to make online shopping more convenient. 
A digital wallet typically resides on a user’s smartphone and contains an individual’s mailing address, credit card, and other information typically required to make an online purchase. 
Digital whiteboard: A specialized device with a large display connected to a computer or projector. 
DIMM (dual in-line memory module): An expansion module used to add memory to the system board. 
Direct approach: Approach for systems implementation whereby the old system is simply abandoned for the new system. 
Directory server: A specialized server that manages resources such as user accounts for an entire network. 
Disaster recovery plan: Plan used by large organizations describing ways to continue operations following a disaster until normal computer operations can be restored. 
Disaster recovery specialist: Worker responsible for recovering systems and data after a disaster strikes an organization. 
Disk caching: Method of improving hard-disk performance by anticipating data needs. 
Frequently used data is read from the hard disk into memory (cache). 
When needed, data is then accessed directly from memory, which has a much faster transfer rate than from the hard disk. 
Increases performance by as much as 30 percent. 
Disk Cleanup: A Windows troubleshooting utility that eliminates nonessential files. 
Display: Output device like a television screen that displays data processed by the computer. 
Display screen: See Display. 
Distributed database: Database that can be made accessible through a variety of communications networks, which allow portions of the database to be located in different places. 
Document: Any kind of text material. 
Document file: File created by a word processor to save documents such as letters, research papers, and memos. 
Document scanner: Similar to a flatbed scanner except that it can quickly scan multipage documents. 
It automatically feeds one page of a document at a time through a scanning surface. 
Documentation: Written descriptions and procedures about a program and how to use it. 
See also Program documentation. 
Domain name: The second part of the URL; it is the name of the server where the resource is located. 
For example, www.mtv.com. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 381 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 381 12/02/15 02:32 PM Expansion slots: Openings on a system board. 
Users can insert optional devices, known as expansion cards, into these slots, allowing users to expand their systems. 
See also Expansion card. 
Expert system: Computer program that provides advice to decision makers who would otherwise rely on human experts. 
It’s a type of artificial intelligence that uses a database to provide assistance to users. 
External data: Data gathered from outside an organization. 
Examples are data provided by market research firms. 
External hard drive: Uses the same technology as an internal hard disk but is used primarily to complement an internal hard disk by providing additional storage. 
It is typically connected to a USB or FireWire port on the system unit and is easily removed. 
External Serial Advanced Technology Attachment (eSATA) port:  A port that provides high speed connections for external harddisk drives, optical discs, and other large secondary storage devices. 
Extranet: Private network that connects more than one organization. 
f Facebook: One of the best-known social networking sites. 
Facebook groups: Communities of individuals who share common interest on Facebook. 
Facebook Pages: Often used by businesses and public figures to promote ideas, products, and services. 
Facebook Profile: An individual’s Facebook page, which may include photos, lists of personal interests, contact information, and other personal information. 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA): A federal law that restricts disclosure of educational records. 
Fiber-optic cable: Special transmission cable made of glass tubes that are immune to electronic interference. 
Data is transmitted through fiber-optic cables in the form of pulses of light. 
Fiber-optic service (FiOS): An Internet connection service that is not yet widely available. 
Current providers of FiOS include Google and Verizon with speeds faster than cable or DSL connections. 
Field: Each column of information within a record is called a field. 
A field contains related information on a specific item like employee names within a company department. 
Fifth-generation language (5GL): Computer language that incorporates the concept of artificial intelligence to allow direct human communication. 
File: A collection of related records that can store data and programs. 
For example, the payroll file would include payroll information (records) for all of the employees (entities). 
File compression: Process of reducing the storage requirements for a file. 
File compression program: Utility program that reduces the size of files so they require less storage on the computer and can be sent more efficiently over the Internet. 
Examples of such programs are WinZip and Wizard. 
File decompression: Process of expanding a compressed file. 
Electronic books: Traditional printed books in electronic format. 
Electronic commerce (e-commerce): Buying and selling goods over the Internet. 
Electronic mail: Transmission of electronic messages over the Internet. 
Also known as e-mail. 
Electronic profile: Using publicly and privately available databases, information resellers create electronic profiles, which are highly detailed and personalized descriptions of individuals. 
Embedded operating system: An operating system that is completely stored within the ROM (read-only memory) of the device that it is in; used for handheld computers and smaller devices like PDAs. 
Also known as a real- time operating system (RTOS). 
Employee-monitoring software: Programs that record virtually every activity on a computer system. 
Encryption: Coding information so that only the user can read or otherwise use it. 
Encryption key: A number used to gain access to encrypted information. 
End user: Person who uses personal computers or has access to larger computers. 
Enterprise storage system: Using mass storage devices, a strategy designed for organizations to promote efficient and safe use of data across the networks within their organizations. 
Entity: In an object-oriented database, a person, place, thing, or event that is to be described. 
Ergonomics: The study of human factors related to things people use. 
Ethernet: Otherwise known as Ethernet bus or Ethernet LAN. 
The Ethernet bus is the pathway or arterial to which all nodes (PCs, file servers, print servers, web servers, etc.) are connected. 
All of this is connected to a local area network (LAN) or a wide area network (WAN). 
See also Bus network. 
Ethernet cable: Twisted-pair cable commonly used in networks and to connect a variety of components to the system unit. 
Ethernet port: A high-speed networking port that allows multiple computers to be connected for sharing files or for high-speed Internet access. 
Ethics: Standards of moral conduct. 
Exception report: Report that calls attention to unusual events. 
Executive information system (EIS): Sophisticated software that can draw together data from an organization’s databases in meaningful patterns and highly summarized forms. 
Executive support system (ESS): See Executive information system. 
Expansion bus: Connects the CPU to slots on the system board. 
There are different types of expansion buses such as industry standard architecture (ISA), peripheral component interconnect (PCI), accelerated graphics port (AGP), universal serial bus (USB), and FireWire buses. 
See also System bus. 
Expansion card: Optional device that plugs into a slot inside the system unit to expand the computer’s abilities. 
Ports on the system board allow cables to be connected from the expansion board to devices outside the system unit. 
Final PDF to printer 382 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 382 12/02/15 02:32 PM Gamepad: An input device designed to be held by two hands and provide a wide array of inputs including motion, turning, stopping, and firing. 
Gaming laptop: A laptop with high-end graphics hardware and a very fast processor specifically designed to play computer games. 
Gaming mice: A game controller that provides greater precision, faster response, programming buttons, and better ergonomics than a traditional mouse. 
General ledger: Activity that produces income statements and balance sheets based on all transactions of a company. 
General-purpose application: Application used for doing common tasks, such as browsers and word processors, spreadsheets, databases, management systems, and presentation graphics. 
Also known as productivity applications. 
Generations (of programming languages): The five generations are machine languages, assembly languages, procedural languages, problem-oriented languages, and natural languages. 
See also Levels. 
Gesture control: The ability to control operations with finger movements, such as swiping, sliding, and pinching. 
Gestures: A feature of Mac OS 10.7 that allows the use of fingers to run programs and to control the content of a display screen. 
Global positioning system (GPS): Devices that use location information to determine the geographic location of your car, for example. 
Gloves: Interactive sensory equipment that collects data from your hand movements. 
Google+: See Google Plus. 
Google Cloud Print: A Google service that supports cloud printing. 
Google Plus: A combination of some of Google’s previously existing services with some new services, many of which are similar to Facebook’s services. 
GPU (graphics processing unit): See Graphics coprocessor. 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act: A law that protects personal financial information. 
Graphical user interface (GUI): Special screen that allows software commands to be issued through the use of graphic symbols (icons) or pull-down menus. 
Graphics card: Device that provides high-quality 3D graphics and animation for games and simulations. 
Graphics coprocessor: Designed to handle requirements related to displaying and manipulating 2D and 3D graphic images. 
Grayscale: The most common black ink selection in which images are displayed using many shades of gray. 
Grid chart: Chart that shows the relationship between input and output documents. 
Group decision support system (GDSS): System used to support the collective work of a team addressing large problems. 
Groups: In Microsoft Word, each tab is organized into groups that contain related items. 
Guest operating system: Operating system that operates on virtual machines. 
File History: A utility program included with many versions of Windows that makes a copy of all files or selected files that have been saved onto a disk. 
File server: Dedicated computer with large storage capacity providing users access to shared folders or fast storage and retrieval of information used in that business. 
File transfer protocol (FTP): Internet service for uploading and downloading files. 
Filter: (1) A filter blocks access to selected websites. 
(2) A filter will locate or display records from a table that fit a set of conditions or criteria when using programs like Excel. 
Firewall: Security hardware and software. 
All communications into and out of an organization pass through a special security computer, called a proxy server, to protect all systems against external threats. 
FireWire bus: Operates much like USB buses on the system board but at higher speeds. 
FireWire port: Used to connect high-speed printers, and even video cameras, to system unit. 
First-party cookie: A cookie that is generated and then read only by the website you are currently visiting. 
Flash drive: See USB drive. 
Flash memory: RAM chips that retain data even when power is disrupted. 
Flash memory is an example of solid-state storage and is typically used to store digitized images and record MP3 files. 
Flash memory card: A solid-state storage device widely used in notebook computers. 
Flash memory also is used in a variety of specialized input devices to capture and transfer data to desktop computers. 
Flat-panel monitor: Or liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor. 
These monitors are much thinner than CRTs and can be used for desktop systems as well. 
Flatbed scanner: An input device similar to a copying machine. 
Folder: A named area on a disk that is used to store related subfolders and files. 
Foreground: The current program when multitasking or running multiple programs at once. 
Fourth-generation language (4GL): Task-oriented language designed to solve a specific problem and requiring little special training on the part of the end user. 
Fragmented: Storage technique that breaks up large files and stores the parts wherever space is available. 
Freedom of Information Act of 1970: Law giving citizens the right to examine data about them in federal government files, except for information restricted for national security reasons. 
Friend: An individual on a list of contacts for an instant messaging server. 
g Galleries: Feature of Microsoft Office 2007, 2010, and 2013 that simplifies the process of making selections from a list of alternatives by replacing dialog boxes with visual presentations of results. 
Game controller: A device that provides input to computer games. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 383 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 383 12/02/15 02:32 PM Host: Also called a server or provider, is a large centralized computer. 
Host operating system: Operating system that runs on the physical machine. 
Hotspot: Wireless access points that provide Internet access and are often available in public places such as coffee shops, libraries, bookstores, colleges, and universities. 
HTML: See Hypertext Markup Language. 
HTML editor: See Web authoring program. 
Hub: The center or central node for other nodes. 
This device can be a server or a connection point for cables from other nodes. 
Human resources: The organizational department that focuses on the hiring, training, and promoting of people, as well as any number of human-centered activities within the organization. 
Hyperlink: Connection or link to other documents or web pages that contain related information. 
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML): Programming language that creates document files used to display web pages. 
Hypertext transfer protocol secure (https): A widely used protocol for web traffic and to protect the transfer of sensitive information. 
i Icons: Graphic objects on the desktop used to represent programs and other files. 
Identity theft: The illegal assumption of someone’s identity for the purpose of economic gain. 
IF-THEN-ELSE structure: Logical selection structure whereby one of two paths is followed according to IF, THEN, and ELSE statements in a program. 
See also Selection structure. 
IFPS (interactive financial planning system): A 4GL language used for developing financial models. 
Illusion of anonymity: The misconception that being selective about disclosing personal information on the Internet can prevent an invasion of personal privacy. 
Illustration program: Also known as drawing programs; used to create digital illustrations and modify vector images and thus create line art, 3D models, and virtual reality. 
Image editor: An application for modifying bitmap images. 
Immersive experience: Allows the user to walk into a virtual reality room or view simulations on a virtual reality wall. 
Incognito mode: A privacy mode available from the Google Chrome browser. 
Income statement: A statement that shows a company’s financial performance, income, expenses, and the difference between them for a specific time period. 
Individual database: Collection of integrated records used mainly by just one person. 
Also called personal computer database. 
Information: Data that has been processed by a computer system. 
Information broker: See Information reseller. 
Information reseller: Also known as information broker. 
It gathers personal data on people and sells it to direct marketers, fund-raisers, and others, usually for a fee. 
h Hacker: Person who gains unauthorized access to a computer system for the fun and challenge of it. 
Handwriting recognition software: Translates handwritten notes into a form that the system unit can process. 
Hangouts: A service offered through Google Plus, for communicating with up to 10 people at a time. 
Hard copy: Information presented on paper; also referred to as printer output. 
Hard disk: Enclosed disk drive containing one or more metallic disks. 
Hard disks use magnetic charges to record data and have large storage capacities and fast retrieval times. 
Hardware: Equipment that includes a keyboard, monitor, printer, the computer itself, and other devices that are controlled by software programming. 
Head crash: When a read-write head makes contact with the hard disk’s surface or particles on its surface, the disk surface becomes scratched and some or all data is destroyed. 
Header: A typical e-mail has three elements: header, message, and signature. 
The header appears first and includes addresses, subject, and attachments. 
Headgear: Interactive sensory equipment that collects data from embedded earphones and three-dimensional stereoscopic screens. 
Headphones: Typically worn around the head providing audio output. 
Headsets: Audio-output devices connected to a sound card in the system unit. 
The sound card is used to capture as well as play back recorded sound. 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA):  A federal law that protects medical records. 
Help: A feature in most application software providing options that typically include an index, a glossary, and a search feature to locate reference information about specific commands. 
Hexadecimal system (hex): Uses 16 digits to represent binary numbers. 
Hi def (high definition): The next generation of optical disc, with increased storage capacity. 
See also BD (Blu-ray disc). 
Hierarchical database: Database in which fields or records are structured in nodes. 
Organized in the shape of a pyramid, and each node is linked directly to the nodes beneath it. 
Also called one-to-many relationship. 
Hierarchical network: See Tree network. 
High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) port: Port that provides high-definition video and audio, making it possible to use a computer as a video jukebox or an HD video recorder. 
Higher level: Programming languages that are closer to the language humans use. 
History file: Created by the browser to store information on websites visited by your computer system. 
Hits: The sites that a search engine returns after running a keyword search, ordered from most likely to least likely to contain the information requested. 
Home network: LAN network for homes allowing different computers to share resources, including a common Internet connection. 
Final PDF to printer 384 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 384 12/02/15 02:32 PM Intrusion detection system (IDS): Using sophisticated statistical techniques to analyze all incoming and outgoing network traffic, this system works with firewalls to protect an organization’s network. 
Inventory: Material or products that a company has in stock. 
Inventory control system: A system that keeps records of the number of each kind of part or finished good in the warehouse. 
iOS: Previously known as iPhone OS, mobile operating system developed for Apple’s iPhone, iPod Touch, and iPad. 
IP address (Internet Protocol address): The unique numeric address of a computer on the Internet that facilitates the delivery of e-mail. 
IP telephony: See Telephony. 
iPhone OS: See iOS. 
IT security analyst: Person responsible for maintaining the security of a company’s network, systems, and data. 
Employers look for candidates with a bachelor’s or associate’s degree in information systems or computer science and network experience. 
j JavaScript: A scripting language that adds basic interactivity to web pages. 
Joystick: Popular input device for computer games. 
You control game actions by varying the pressure, speed, and direction of the joystick. 
k Key: Another term for encryption key. 
Key field: The common field by which tables in a database are related to each other. 
This field uniquely identifies the record. 
For example, in university databases, a key field is the Social Security number. 
Also known as primary key. 
Keyboard: Input device that looks like a typewriter keyboard but has additional keys. 
Keystroke logger: Also known as computer monitoring software and sniffer programs. 
They can be loaded onto your computer without your knowledge. 
Knowledge base: A system that uses a database containing specific facts, rules to relate these facts, and user input to formulate recommendations and decisions. 
Knowledge-based systems: Programs duplicating human knowledge. 
A type of artificial intelligence that uses a database to provide assistance to users. 
Knowledge work system (KWS): Specialized information system used to create information in a specific area of expertise. 
Knowledge worker: Person involved in the creation of information, such as an engineer or a scientist. 
l Land: See Lands and pits. 
Lands and pits: Flat and bumpy areas, respectively, that represent 1s and 0s on the optical disc surface to be read by a laser. 
Information system: Collection of hardware, software, people, data, and procedures that work together to provide information essential to running an organization. 
Information systems manager: Oversees the work of programmers, computer specialists, systems analysts, and other computer professionals. 
Information technology (IT): Computer and communication technologies, such as communication links to the Internet, that provide help and understanding to the end user. 
Information utility: See Commercial database. 
Information worker: Employee who creates, distributes, and communicates information. 
Infrared: Uses infrared light waves to communicate over short distances. 
Sometimes referred to as line-of-sight communication because light waves can only travel in a straight line. 
Inkjet printer: Printer that sprays small droplets of ink at high speed onto the surface of the paper, producing letter-quality images, and can print in color. 
Input: Any data or instructions used by a computer. 
Input device: Piece of equipment that translates data into a form a computer can process. 
The most common input devices are the keyboard and the mouse. 
Instant messaging (IM): A program allowing communication and collaboration for direct, “live” connections over the Internet between two or more people. 
Integrated circuit: See Silicon chip. 
Interactive whiteboard: See Digital whiteboard. 
Internal data: Data from within an organization consisting principally of transactions from the transaction processing system. 
Internal hard disk: Storage device consisting of one or more metallic platters sealed inside a container. 
Internal hard disks are installed inside the system cabinet of a personal computer. 
It stores the operating system and major applications like Word. 
Internet: A huge computer network available to everyone with a personal computer and a means to connect to it. 
It is the actual physical network made up of wires, cables, and satellites as opposed to the web, which is the multimedia interface to resources available on the Internet. 
Internet of Things (IoT): Continuing development of the Internet that allows everyday objects embedded with electronic devices to send and receive data over the Internet. 
Internet scam: Using the Internet, a fraudulent act or operation designed to trick individuals into spending their time and money for little or no return. 
Internet security suite: Collection of utility programs designed to make using the Internet easier and safer. 
Internet service provider (ISP): Provides access to the Internet. 
Internet telephony: See Telephony. 
Interpreter: Software that converts a procedural language one statement at a time into machine language just before the statement is executed. 
No object code is saved. 
Intranet: Like the Internet, it typically provides e-mail, mailing lists, newsgroups, and FTP services, but it is accessible only to those within the organization. 
Organizations use intranets to provide information to their employees. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 385 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 385 12/02/15 02:32 PM m Mac OS: Operating system designed for Macintosh computers. 
Mac OS X: Macintosh operating system featuring a user interface called Aqua. 
Machine language: Language in which data is represented in 1s and 0s. 
Most languages have to be translated into machine language for the computer to process the data. 
Either a compiler or an interpreter performs this translation. 
Magnetic card reader: A card reader that reads encoded information from a magnetic strip on the back of a card. 
Magnetic-ink character recognition (MICR): Direct-entry scanning devices used in banks. 
This technology is used to automatically read the numbers on the bottom of checks. 
Mainboard: See Motherboard or System board. 
Mainframe computer: This computer can process several million program instructions per second. 
Sizable organizations rely on these room-size systems to handle large programs and a great deal of data. 
Maintenance programmer: Programmer who maintains software by updating programs to protect them from errors, improve usability, standardize, and adjust to organizational changes. 
Malware: Short for malicious software. 
MAN: See Metropolitan area network. 
Management information system (MIS): Computer-based information system that produces standardized reports in a summarized and structured form. 
Generally used to support middle managers. 
Many-to-many relationship: In a network database, each child node may have more than one parent node and vice versa. 
Marketing: The organizational department that plans, prices, promotes, sells, and distributes an organization’s goods and services. 
Mass storage: Refers to the tremendous amount of secondary storage required by large organizations. 
Mass storage devices: Devices such as file servers, RAID systems, tape libraries, optical jukeboxes, and more. 
MaxiCode: A code widely used by the United Parcel Service (UPS) and others to automate the process of routing packages, tracking in-transit packages, and locating lost packages. 
Media: Media are the actual physical material that holds the data, such as a hard disk, which is one of the important characteristics of secondary storage. 
Singular of media is medium. 
Medium: See Media. 
Medium band: Bandwidth of special leased lines, used mainly with minicomputers and mainframe computers. 
Megabits per second (Mbps): The transfer rate of millions of bits per second. 
Memory: Memory is contained on chips connected to the system board and is a holding area for data instructions and information (processed data waiting to be output to secondary storage). 
RAM, ROM, and CMOS are three types of memory chips. 
Menu: List of commands. 
Language translator: Converts programming instructions into a machine language that can be processed by a computer. 
Laptop: A small, portable system unit that contains electronic components, selected secondary storage devices, and input devices. 
Laptop computer: Portable computer, also known as a notebook computer, weighing between 4 and 10 pounds. 
Laptop keyboard: Almost all laptops have attached keyboards and screens. 
Laser printer: Printer that creates dotlike images on a drum, using a laser beam light source. 
Levels: Generations or levels of programming languages ranging from “low” to “high.” See also Generations (of programming languages). 
Light-emitting diode (LED): A technology for flat-panel monitors that have a more advanced backlighting technology. 
They produce better-quality images, are slimmer, and are more environmentally friendly as they require less power and use fewer toxic chemicals to manufacture. 
Most new monitors are LED. 
Link: A connection to related information. 
LinkedIn: The premier business-oriented social networking site. 
Linux: Type of UNIX operating system initially developed by Linus Torvalds, it is one of the most popular and powerful alternatives to the Windows operating system. 
Liquid crystal display (LCD): A technology used for flat-panel monitors. 
Local area network (LAN): Network consisting of computers and other devices that are physically near each other, such as within the same building. 
Location: For browsers to connect to resources, locations or addresses must be specified. 
Also known as uniform resource locators or URLs. 
Logic error: Error that occurs when a programmer has used an incorrect calculation or left out a programming procedure. 
Logic structure: Programming statements or structures called sequence, selection, or loop that control the logical sequence in which computer program instructions are executed. 
Logical operation: Comparing two pieces of data to see whether one is equal to (=), less than () the other. 
Logical view: Focuses on the meaning and content of the data. 
End users and computer professionals are concerned with this view as opposed to the physical view, with which only specialized computer professionals are concerned. 
Loop structure: Logic structure in which a process may be repeated as long as a certain condition remains true. 
This structure is called a “loop” because the program loops around or repeats again and again. 
Low bandwidth: See Voiceband. 
Lower level: Programming language closer to the language the computer itself uses. 
The computer understands the 0s and 1s that make up bits and bytes. 
LTE (Long Term Evolution): A wireless standard, comparable to WiMax. 
Final PDF to printer 386 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 386 12/02/15 02:32 PM Mouse: Device that typically is moved across the desktop and directs the cursor on the display screen. 
Mouse pointer: Typically in the shape of an arrow. 
Multicore processor: A new type of chip that provides two or more separate and independent CPUs. 
Multidimensional database: Data can be viewed as a cube having three or more sides consisting of cells. 
Each side of the cube is considered a dimension of the data; thus, complex relationships between data can be represented and efficiently analyzed. 
Sometimes called a data cube and designed for analyzing large groups of records. 
Multifunctional devices (MFD): Devices that typically combine the capabilities of a scanner, printer, fax, and copying machine. 
Multimedia messaging service (MMS): Supports the sending of images, video, and sound using text messaging. 
Multitasking: Operating system that allows a single user to run several application programs at the same time. 
Multitouch screen: Can be touched with more than one finger, which allows for interactions such as rotating graphical objects on the screen with your hand or zooming in and out by pinching and stretching your fingers. 
Musical instrument digital interface (MIDI): A standard that allows musical instruments to connect to the system using MIDI ports. 
n Natural language: A fifth-generation computer language (5GL) that allows a person to describe a problem and some constraints, and then request a solution using a common language like English. 
Network: The arrangement in which various communications channels are connected through two or more computers. 
The largest network in the world is the Internet. 
Network adapter card: Connects the system unit to a cable that connects to other devices on the network. 
Network administrator: Also known as network manager. 
Computer professional who ensures that existing information and communication systems are operating effectively and that new ones are implemented as needed. 
Also responsible for meeting security and privacy requirements. 
Network architecture: Describes how networks are configured and how the resources are shared. 
Network attached storage (NAS): Similar to a file server except simpler and less expensive. 
Widely used for home and small business storage needs. 
Network database: Database with a hierarchical arrangement of nodes, except that each child node may have more than one parent node. 
Also called many-to-many relationship. 
Network gateway: Connection by which a local area network may be linked to other local area networks or to larger networks. 
Network interface card (NIC): Also known as a network adapter card. 
Used to connect a computer to one or more computers forming a communication network whereby users can share data, programs, and hardware. 
Menu bar: Menus are displayed in a menu bar at the top of the screen. 
Mesh network: A topology requiring each node to have more than one connection to the other nodes so that if a path between two nodes is disrupted, data can be automatically rerouted around the failure using another path. 
Message: The content portion of e-mail correspondence. 
Methods: Instructions for retrieving or manipulating attribute values in an object-oriented database. 
Metropolitan area network (MAN): These networks are used as links between office buildings in a city. 
Microblog: Publishes short sentences that only take a few seconds to write, rather than long stories or posts like a traditional blog. 
Microprocessor: The central processing unit (CPU) of a personal computer controls and manipulates data to produce information. 
The microprocessor is contained on a single integrated circuit chip and is the brains of the system. 
Also known as a processor. 
Microwave: Communication using high-frequency radio waves that travel in straight lines through the air. 
Middle management: Middle-level managers deal with control and planning. 
They implement the long-term goals of the organization. 
MIDI: See Musical instrument digital interface. 
Midrange computer: Refrigerator-sized machines falling in between personal computers and mainframes in processing speed and data-storing capacity. 
Medium-sized companies or departments of large companies use midrange computers. 
Mini DisplayPort (MiniDP or mDP) port: A port that an audiovisual device typically uses to connect large monitors. 
These ports are used with many Apple Macintosh computers. 
Mini notebook: A type of very portable laptop. 
They are lighter and thinner and have a longer battery life than other laptops. 
Also known as ultrabooks or ultraportables. 
Mini tablets: A type of tablet with a smaller screen. 
Mistaken identity: Occurs when the electronic profile of one person is switched with another. 
Mobile apps (applications): Add-on features for a variety of mobile devices, including smartphones, netbooks, and tablets. 
Mobile browser: Special browsers designed to run on portable devices. 
Mobile operating system: Embedded operating system that controls a smartphone. 
Mobile OS: See Mobile operating system. 
Modem: Short for modulator-demodulator. 
It is a communication device that translates the electronic signals from a computer into electronic signals that can travel over telephone lines. 
Modulation: Process of converting digital signals to analog signals. 
Module: See Program module. 
Monitor: See Display. 
Motherboard: Also called a system board; the communications medium for the entire system. 
Motion-sensing device: An input device that controls games with user movements. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 387 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 387 12/02/15 02:32 PM Open source: A free and openly distributed software program intended to allow users to improve upon and further develop the program. 
Operating system (OS): Software that interacts between application software and the computer, handling such details as running programs, storing and processing data, and coordinating all computer resources, including attached peripheral devices. 
It is the most important program on the computer. 
Windows 7, Windows 8, and Mac OS X are examples of operating systems. 
Operational feasibility: Making sure the design of a new system will be able to function within the existing framework of an organization. 
Operational model: A decision model that helps lower-level managers accomplish the organization’s day-to-day activities, such as evaluating and maintaining quality control. 
Operators: Operators handle correcting operational errors in any programs. 
To do that, they need documentation, which lets them understand the program, thus enabling them to fix any errors. 
Optical carrier (OC): Provides support for very high speed, all-digital transmission for large corporations. 
Optical-character recognition (OCR): Scanning device that uses special preprinted characters, such as those printed on utility bills, that can be read by a light source and changed into machine-readable code. 
Optical disc: Storage device that can hold over 17 gigabytes of data, which is the equivalent of several million typewritten pages. 
Lasers are used to record and read data on the disc. 
The three basic types of optical discs are compact discs (CDs), digital versatile or video discs (DVDs), and Blu-ray discs (BDs). 
Optical disc drive: A disc is read by an optical disc drive using a laser that projects a tiny beam of light. 
The amount of reflected light determines whether the area represents a 1 or a 0. 
Optical-mark recognition (OMR): Device that senses the presence or absence of a mark, such as a pencil mark. 
As an example, an OMR device is used to score multiple-choice tests. 
Optical mouse: A type of mouse that emits and senses light to detect mouse movement. 
Optical scanner: Device that identifies images or text on a page and automatically converts it to electronic signals that can be stored in a computer to copy or reproduce. 
Optimize Drives: A Windows utility that optimizes disk performance by eliminating unnecessary fragments and rearranging files. 
Organic light-emitting diode (OLED): Replaces LED monitor’s backlighting technology with a thin layer of organic compound that produces light. 
Organization chart: Chart showing the levels of management and formal lines of authority in an organization. 
Organizational cloud storage: High-speed Internet connection to a dedicated remote organizational Internet drive site. 
OS X Mavericks: Mac operating system announced in 2013 that provided better power management and enhanced workflow options for multiple monitor setups. 
OS X Yosemite: Mac operating system released in 2014 that provided a new user interface similar to the iOS interface. 
Output: Processed data or information. 
Network operating system (NOS): Interactive software between applications and computers coordinating and directing activities between computers on a network. 
This operating system is located on one of the connected computers’ hard disks, making that system the network server. 
Network server: This computer coordinates all communication between the other computers. 
Popular network operating systems include NetWare and Windows NT Server. 
See also Network operating system. 
Node: Any device connected to a network. 
For example, a node is a computer, printer, or data storage device and each device has its own address on the network. 
Also, within hierarchical databases, fields or records are structured in nodes. 
Notebook computer: See Laptop and Laptop computer. 
o Object: An element, such as a text box, that can be added to a workbook and can be selected, sized, and moved. 
For example, if a chart (object) in an Excel workbook file (source file) is linked to a Word document (destination file), the chart appears in the Word document. 
In this manner, the object contains both data and instructions to manipulate the data. 
Object code: Machine language code converted by a compiler from source code. 
Object code can be saved and run later. 
Object-oriented database: A more flexible type of database that stores data as well as instructions to manipulate data and is able to handle unstructured data such as photographs, audio, and video. 
Object-oriented databases organize data using objects, classes, entities, attributes, and methods. 
Object-oriented programming (OOP): Methodology in which a program is organized into self-contained, reusable modules called objects. 
Each object contains both the data and processing operations necessary to perform a task. 
Object-oriented software development: Software development approach that focuses less on the tasks and more on defining the relationships between previously defined procedures or objects. 
Objectives: In programming, it is necessary to make clear the problems you are trying to solve to create a functional program. 
Office automation system (OAS): System designed primarily to support data workers. 
It focuses on managing documents, communicating, and scheduling. 
Office software suites: See Productivity suites. 
Office suites: See Productivity suites. 
One-to-many relationship: In a hierarchical database, each entry has one parent node, and a parent may have several child nodes. 
Online: Being connected to the Internet is described as being online. 
Online identity: The information that people voluntarily post about themselves online. 
Online office suite: Office suite stored online and available anywhere the Internet can be accessed. 
Online processing: See Real-time processing. 
Online storage: Provides users with storage space that can be accessed from a website. 
Final PDF to printer 388 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 388 12/02/15 02:32 PM Picture element: See Pixel. 
Pilot approach: Systems implementation in which a new system is tried out in only one part of the organization. 
Later it is implemented throughout the rest of the organization. 
Pit: See Lands and pits. 
Pixel (picture element): Smallest unit on the screen that can be turned on and off or made different shades. 
Pixels are individual dots that form images on a monitor. 
The greater the resolution, the more pixels and the better the clarity. 
Pixel pitch: The distance between each pixel on a monitor. 
Plagiarism: Representation of some other person’s work and ideas as your own without giving credit to the original source. 
Plagiarist: Someone who engages in plagiarism. 
Platform: The operating system. 
Application programs are designed to run with a specific platform. 
See also Operating system. 
Platform scanner: Handheld direct-entry device used to read special characters on price tags. 
Also known as wand reader. 
Platter: Rigid metallic disk; multiple platters are stacked one on top of another within a hard-disk drive. 
Plotter: Special-purpose output device for producing bar charts, maps, architectural drawings, and three-dimensional illustrations. 
Plug and Play: Set of hardware and software standards developed to create operating systems, processing units, expansion cards, and other devices that are able to configure themselves. 
When the computer starts up, it will search for the Plug and Play device and automatically configure it to the system. 
Plug-in: Program that is automatically loaded and operates as part of a browser. 
Podcast: An Internet-based medium for delivering music and movie files from the Internet to a computer. 
Pointer: For a monitor, a pointer is typically displayed as an arrow and controlled by a mouse. 
For a database, a pointer is a connection between a parent node and a child node in a hierarchical database. 
Pointers: Within a network database, pointers are additional connections between parent nodes and child nodes. 
Thus, a node may be reached through more than one path and can be traced down through different branches. 
Pointing device: A device that provides an intuitive interface with the system unit by accepting pointing gestures and converting them into machine-readable input. 
Port: Connecting socket on the outside of the system unit. 
Used to connect input and output devices to the system unit. 
Portable language: Language that can be run on more than one type of computer. 
Portable scanner: A handheld device that slides across an image to be scanned, making direct contact. 
Power supply unit: Desktop computers have a power supply unit located within the system unit that plugs into a standard wall outlet, converting AC to DC, which becomes the power to drive all of the system unit components. 
Preliminary investigation: First phase of the systems life cycle. 
It involves defining the problem, suggesting alternative systems, and preparing a short report. 
Presentation file: A file created by presentation graphics programs to save presentation materials. 
For example, a file might contain audience handouts, speaker notes, and electronic slides. 
Output device: Equipment that translates processed information from the central processing unit into a form that can be understood by humans. 
The most common output devices are monitors and printers. 
p Packet: Before a message is sent on the Internet, it is broken down into small parts called packets. 
Each packet is then sent separately over the Internet. 
At the receiving end, the packets are reassembled into the correct order. 
Page layout program: See Desktop publishing program. 
Parallel approach: Systems implementation in which old and new systems are operated side by side until the new one has shown it is reliable. 
Parallel processing: Used by supercomputers to run large and complex programs. 
Parent node: Node one level above the node being considered in a hierarchical database or network. 
Each entry has one parent node, although a parent may have several child nodes. 
Also called one-to-many relationship. 
Password: Special sequence of numbers or letters that limits access to information, such as electronic mail. 
Password managers: Programs that help users create, use, and recall strong passwords. 
Patches: Programming modifications or corrections. 
Payroll: Activity concerned with calculating employee paychecks. 
PC: See Personal computer. 
PCI Express (PCIe): New type of bus that is 30 times faster than PCI bus. 
Peer-to-peer (P2P) network: Network in which nodes can act as both servers and clients. 
For example, one personal computer can obtain files located on another personal computer and also can provide files to other personal computers. 
People: End users who use computers to make themselves more productive. 
Periodic report: Reports for a specific time period as to the health of the company or a particular department of the company. 
Personal area network (PAN): A type of wireless network that works within a very small area—your immediate surroundings. 
Personal computer: Small, low-cost computer designed for individual users. 
These include desktop computers, laptops, and mobile devices. 
Personal computer database: See Individual database. 
Personal laser printer: Inexpensive laser printer widely used by single users to produce black-and-white documents. 
Phased approach: Systems implementation whereby a new system is implemented gradually over a period of time. 
Phishing: An attempt to trick Internet users into thinking a fake but official-looking website or e-mail is legitimate. 
Photo editor: See Image editor. 
Physical security: Activity concerned with protecting hardware from possible human and natural disasters. 
Physical view: This focuses on the actual format and location of the data. 
See also Logical view. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 389 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 389 12/02/15 02:32 PM software development, is a six-step procedure for creating that list of instructions. 
The six steps are program specification, program design, program code (or coding), program test, program documentation, and program maintenance. 
Programming language: A collection of symbols, words, and phrases that instruct a computer to perform a specific task. 
Project manager: Software that enables users to plan, schedule, and control the people, resources, and costs needed to complete a project on time. 
Property: Computer ethics issue relating to who owns data and rights to software. 
Protocol: Rules for exchanging data between computers. 
The protocol http:// is the most common. 
Prototyping: Building a model or prototype that can be modified before the actual system is installed. 
Proxy server: Computer that acts as a gateway or checkpoint in an organization’s firewall. 
See also Firewall. 
Pseudocode: An outline of the logic of the program to be written. 
It is the steps or the summary of the program before you actually write the program for the computer. 
Consequently, you can see beforehand what the program is to accomplish. 
Purchase order: A form that shows the name of the company supplying the material or service and what is being purchased. 
Purchasing: Buying of raw materials and services. 
q Query-by-example: A specific tool in database management that shows a blank record and lets you specify the information needed, like the fields and values of the topic you are looking to obtain. 
Query language: Easy-to-use language and understandable to most users. 
It is used to search and generate reports from a database. 
An example is the language used on an airline reservation system. 
r RAID system: Several inexpensive hard-disk drives connected to improve performance and provide reliable storage. 
RAM: See Random-access memory. 
Random-access memory (RAM): Volatile, temporary storage that holds the program and data the CPU is presently processing. 
It is called temporary storage because its contents will be lost if electrical power to the computer is disrupted or the computer is turned off. 
Rapid applications development (RAD): Involves the use of powerful development software and specialized teams as an alternative to the systems development life cycle approach. 
Time for development is shorter and quality of the completed systems development is better, although cost is greater. 
Raster: See Bitmap image. 
Read-only: Optical disc format that does not allow a disc to be written on or erased by the user. 
Read-only memory (ROM): Refers to chips that have programs built into them at the factory. 
The user cannot change the contents of such chips. 
The CPU can read or retrieve the programs on the chips but cannot write or change information. 
Presentation graphics: Graphics used to combine a variety of visual objects to create attractive and interesting presentations. 
Primary key: See Key field. 
Primary storage: Holds data and program instructions for processing data. 
It also holds processed information before it is output. 
See also Memory. 
Printer: Device that produces printed paper output. 
Privacy: Computer ethics issue concerning the collection and use of data about individuals. 
Privacy mode: A browser feature that eliminates history files and blocks most cookies. 
Private Browsing: A privacy mode provided by Safari. 
See also Privacy mode. 
Procedural language: Programming language designed to focus on procedures and how a program will accomplish a specific task. 
Also known as 3GL or third-generation language. 
Procedures: Rules or guidelines to follow when using hardware, software, and data. 
Processing rights: Refers to which people have access to what kind of data. 
Processor: See Central processing unit. 
Production: The organizational department that actually creates finished goods and services using raw materials and personnel. 
Productivity suites: Also known as office suites; contain professional-grade application programs, including word processing, spreadsheets, and more. 
A good example is Microsoft Office. 
Program: Instructions for the computer to follow to process data. 
See also Software. 
Program analysis: See Program specification. 
Program coder: See Application generator. 
Program definition: See Program specification. 
Program design: Creating a solution using programming techniques, such as top-down program design, pseudocode, flowcharts, logic structures, object-oriented programming, and CASE tools. 
Program documentation: Written description of the purpose and process of a program. 
Documentation is written within the program itself and in printed documents. 
Programmers will find themselves frustrated without adequate documentation, especially when it comes time to update or modify the program. 
Program flowchart: Flowchart graphically presents a detailed sequence of steps needed to solve a programming problem. 
Program maintenance: Activity of updating software to correct errors, improve usability, standardize, and adjust to organizational changes. 
Program module: Each module is made up of logically related program statements. 
The program must pass in sequence from one module to the next until the computer has processed all modules. 
Program specification: Programming step in which objectives, output, input, and processing requirements are determined. 
Programmer: Computer professional who creates new software or revises existing software. 
Programming: A program is a list of instructions a computer will follow to process data. 
Programming, also known as Final PDF to printer 390 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 390 12/02/15 02:32 PM s Sales order processing: Activity that records the demands of customers for a company’s products or services. 
Satellite: This type of communication uses satellites orbiting about 22,000 miles above the earth as microwave relay stations. 
Satellite connection services: Connection services that use satellites and the air to download or send data to users at a rate seven times faster than dial-up connections. 
Scam: A fraudulent or deceptive act or operation designed to trick individuals into spending their time and money for little or no return. 
Scanner: See Optical scanner. 
Scanning devices: Convert scanned text and images into a form that the system unit can process. 
Schema: See Data dictionary. 
SD Card: Type of expansion card designed for laptops, tablets, and smartphones. 
Search engine: Specialized programs assisting in locating information on the web and the Internet. 
Search services: Organizations that maintain databases relating to information provided on the Internet and also provide search engines to locate information. 
Secondary storage: Permanent storage used to preserve programs and data that can be retained after the computer is turned off. 
These devices include hard disks, magnetic tape, CDs, DVDs, and more. 
Secondary storage device: These devices are used to save, back up, and transport files from one location or computer to another. 
See also Secondary storage. 
Sector: Section shaped like a pie wedge that divides the tracks on a disk. 
Secure file transfer protocol (SFTP): See File transfer protocol. 
Security: The protection of information, hardware, and software. 
Security suites: A collection of utility programs designed to protect your privacy and security while you are on the web. 
Selection structure: Logic structure that determines which of two paths will be followed when a program must make a decision. 
Also called IF-THEN-ELSE structures. 
IF something is true, THEN do option one, or ELSE do option two. 
Semiconductor: Silicon chip through which electricity flows with some resistance. 
Sequential structure: Logic structure in which one program statement follows another. 
Server: A host computer with a connection to the Internet that stores document files used to display web pages. 
Depending on the resources shared, it may be called a file server, printer server, communication server, web server, or database server. 
Shared laser printer: More expensive laser printer used by a group of users to produce black-and-white documents. 
These printers can produce over 30 pages a minute. 
Signature: Provides additional information about a sender of an e-mail message, such as name, address, and telephone number. 
ROM stores programs that boot the computer, for example. 
Also called firmware. 
Real-time operating system (RTOS): See Embedded operating system. 
Real-time processing: Or online processing. 
Occurs when data is processed at the same time a transaction occurs. 
Record: Each row of information in a database is a record. 
Each record contains fields of data about some specific item, like employee name, address, phone, and so forth. 
A record represents a collection of attributes describing an entity. 
Recordable (R): Optical disc format that allows a disc to be written on once. 
Also known as write-once disc. 
Redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID): Groups of inexpensive hard-disk drives related or grouped together using networks and special software. 
They improve performance by expanding external storage. 
Relation: A table in a relational database in which data elements are stored in rows and columns. 
Relational database: A widely used database structure in which data is organized into related tables. 
Each table is made up of rows called records and columns called fields. 
Each record contains fields of data about a specific item. 
Repetition structure: See Loop structure. 
Repetitive strain injury (RSI): Any injury that is caused by fast, repetitive work that can generate neck, wrist, hand, and arm pain. 
Research: The organizational department that identifies, investigates, and develops new products and services. 
Resolution: A measurement reflecting the quality of an image. 
Rewritable (RW): Optical disc format that allows a disc to be written to multiple times. 
RFID (radio-frequency identification) reader: A device used to read radio-frequency identification information. 
RFID tags: Microchips that contain electronically stored information and can be embedded in items such as consumer products, driver’s licenses, passports, etc. 
Ribbon GUI: An interface that uses a system of ribbons, tabs, and galleries to make it easier to find and use all the features of an application. 
Ribbons: Feature of Microsoft Office 2007, 2010, and 2013 that replaces menus and toolbars by organizing commonly used commands into a set of tabs. 
Ring network: Network in which each device is connected to two other devices, forming a ring. 
There is no host computer, and messages are passed around the ring until they reach the correct destination. 
Robot network: See Botnet. 
Robots: Typically use cameras, microphones, and other sensors as inputs. 
Widely used in factories and other applications involving repetitive actions. 
Rogue Wi-Fi hotspot: Imitation hotspot intended to capture personal information. 
Role playing game (RPG): Computer game in which players assume persona of one of the game’s actors. 
ROM: See Read-only memory. 
Router: A node that forwards or routes data packets from one network to their destination in another network. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 391 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 391 12/02/15 02:32 PM Spam filter: See Spam blocker. 
Speakers: Audio-output devices connected to a sound card in the system unit. 
The sound card is used to capture as well as play back recorded sound. 
Specialized applications: Programs that are narrowly focused on specific disciplines and occupations. 
Some of the best known are multimedia, web authoring, graphics, virtual reality, and artificial intelligence. 
Specialized search engine: Search engine that focuses on subject-specific websites. 
Specialized suite: Programs that focus on specialized applications such as graphics or financial planning. 
Spider: Special program that continually looks for new information and updates a search server’s databases. 
Spreadsheet: Computer-produced spreadsheet based on the traditional accounting worksheet that has rows and columns used to present and analyze data. 
Spy removal programs: Programs such as Spybot and Spysweeper, designed to detect web bugs and monitor software. 
Spyware: Wide range of programs designed to secretly record and report an individual’s activities on the Internet. 
Stand-alone operating system: Also called desktop operating system; a type of operating system that controls a single desktop or notebook computer. 
Star network: Network of computers or peripheral devices linked to a central computer through which all communications pass. 
Control is maintained by polling. 
The configuration of the computers looks like a star surrounding and connected to the central computer in the middle. 
Start screen: Offered in Windows 8 consisting of tiles to link to applications. 
Storage area network (SAN): An architecture that links remote computer storage devices such as enterprise storage systems to computers so that the devices are available as locally attached drives. 
Storage device: Hardware that reads data and programs from storage media. 
Most also write to storage media. 
Strategic model: A decision model that assists top managers in long-range planning, such as stating company objectives or planning plant locations. 
Strategy: A way of coordinating the sharing of information and resources. 
The most common network strategies are terminal, peer-to-peer, and client/server networks. 
Streaming: See Webcast. 
Structured program: Program that uses logic structures according to the program design and the language in which you have chosen to write the program. 
Each language follows techniques like pseudocode, flowcharts, and logic structures. 
Structured programming techniques: Techniques consisting of top-down program design, pseudocode, flowcharts, and logic structures. 
Structured query language (SQL): A program control language used to create sophisticated database applications for requesting information from a database. 
Stylus: Penlike device used with tablets and PDAs that uses pressure to draw images on a screen. 
A stylus interacts with the computer through handwriting recognition software. 
Silicon chip: Tiny circuit board etched on a small square of sandlike material called silicon. 
Chips are mounted on carrier packages, which then plug into sockets on the system board. 
Slot: Area on a system board that accepts expansion cards to expand a computer system’s capabilities. 
Smart card: Type of credit card that contains an embedded microchip to provide added security. 
Smartphone: A type of cell phone that offers a variety of advanced functionality, including Internet and e-mail. 
Smartwatch: A wearable computer that acts as a watch, fitness monitor, and communication device. 
SMS (short messaging service): Texting or process of sending a short electronic message using a wireless network to another person. 
Social networking: Using the Internet to connect individuals. 
Socket: Sockets provide connection points on the system board for holding electronic parts. 
Soft copy: Output from a monitor. 
Software: Computer program consisting of step-by-step instructions, directing the computer on each task it will perform. 
Software development: See Programming. 
Software development life cycle (SDLC): A six-step procedure for software development. 
Software engineer: Programming professional or programmer who analyzes users’ needs and creates application software. 
Software environment: Operating system, also known as software platform, consisting of a collection of programs to handle technical details depending on the type of operating system. 
For example, software designed to run on an Apple computer is compatible with the Mac OS environment. 
Software piracy: Unauthorized copying of programs for personal gain. 
Software platform: See Software environment. 
Software suite: Individual application programs that are sold together as a group. 
Software updates: Patches in which modifications to the software are typically more extensive and significant. 
Solid-state drive (SSD): Designed to be connected inside a microcomputer system the same way an internal hard disk would be but contains solid-state memory instead of magnetic disks to store data. 
Solid-state storage: A secondary storage device that has no moving parts. 
Data is stored and retrieved electronically directly from these devices, much as they would be from conventional computer memory. 
Sort: Tool that rearranges a table’s records numerically or alphabetically according to a selected field. 
Source code: Occurs when a programmer originally writes the code for a program in a particular language. 
This is called source code until it is translated by a compiler for the computer to execute the program. 
It then becomes object code. 
Spam: Unwelcome and unsolicited e-mail that can carry attached viruses. 
Spam blocker: Also referred to as spam filter. 
Software that uses a variety of different approaches to identify and eliminate spam or junk mail. 
Final PDF to printer 392 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 392 12/02/15 02:32 PM Systems design report: Report prepared for higher management describing alternative designs, presenting costs versus benefits, and outlining the effects of alternative designs on the organization. 
Systems development: Phase four of the systems life cycle, consisting of developing software, acquiring hardware, and testing the new system. 
Systems implementation: Phase five of the systems life cycle is converting the old system to the new one and training people to use the new system. 
Also known as conversion. 
Systems life cycle: The six phases of systems analysis and design are called the systems life cycle. 
The phases are preliminary investigation, systems analysis, systems design, systems development, systems implementation, and systems maintenance. 
Systems maintenance: Phase six of the systems life cycle consisting of a systems audit and periodic evaluation. 
t T1: High-speed lines that support all digital communications, provide very high capacity, and are very expensive. 
T3: Copper lines combined to form higher-capacity options. 
Tab: Used to divide the ribbon into major activity areas, with each tab being organized into groups that contain related items. 
Table (in database): The list of records in a database. 
Tables make up the basic structure of a database. 
Their columns display field data and their rows display records. 
See also Field and Record. 
Tablet: A type of personal computer that contains a thin system unit, most of which is the monitor. 
The best-known tablets are Apple’s iPad, Motorola’s Xoom, and HP’s Slate. 
Tablet computer: See Tablet. 
Tactical model: A decision model that assists middle-level managers to control the work of the organization, such as financial planning and sales promotion planning. 
Task-oriented language: Programming language that is nonprocedural and focuses on specifying what the program is to accomplish. 
Also known as 4GL or very high level language. 
Technical feasibility: Making sure hardware, software, and training will be available to facilitate the design of a new system. 
Technical writer: Prepares instruction manuals, technical reports, and other scientific or technical documents. 
Telephone: An input and output device for receiving and sending voice communication. 
Telephone line: A transmission medium for both voice and data. 
Telephony: Communication that uses the Internet rather than traditional communication lines to connect two or more people via telephone. 
Temporary Internet file: File that has web page content and instructions for displaying this content. 
Text messaging (texting): The process of sending a short electronic message typically less than 160 characters using a wireless network to another person who views the message on a mobile device, such as a smartphone. 
Subject: Located in the header of an e-mail message; a oneline description used to present the topic of the message. 
Supercomputer: Fastest calculating device ever invented, processing billions of program instructions per second. 
Used by very large organizations like NASA. 
Supervisor: Manager responsible for managing and monitoring workers. 
Supervisors have responsibility for operational matters. 
Switch: The center or central node for other nodes. 
This device coordinates the flow of data by sending messages directly between sender and receiver nodes. 
Syntax error: Violation of the rules of a language in which the computer program is written. 
For example, leaving out a semicolon would stop the entire program from working because it is not the exact form the computer expects for that language. 
System: Collection of activities and elements designed to accomplish a goal. 
System board: Flat board that usually contains the CPU and memory chips connecting all system components to one another. 
System bus: There are two categories of buses. 
One is the system bus that connects the CPU to the system board. 
The other is the expansion bus that connects the CPU to slots on the system board. 
System chassis: See System unit. 
System flowchart: A flowchart that shows the flow of input data to processing and finally to output, or distribution of information. 
System software: “Background” software that enables the application software to interact with the computer. 
System software consists of the operating system, utilities, device drivers, and language translators. 
It works with application software to handle the majority of technical details. 
System unit: Part of a personal computer that contains the CPU. 
Also known as the system cabinet or chassis, it is the container that houses most of the electronic components that make up the computer system. 
Systems analysis: This second phase of the systems life cycle determines the requirements for a new system. 
Data is collected about the present system and analyzed, and new requirements are determined. 
Systems analysis and design: Six phases of problem-solving procedures for examining information systems and improving them. 
Systems analysis report: Report prepared for higher management describing the current information system, the requirements for a new system, and a possible development schedule. 
Systems analyst: Plans and designs information systems. 
Systems audit: A systems audit compares the performance of a new system to the original design specifications to determine if the new procedures are actually improving productivity. 
Systems design: Phase three of the systems life cycle, consisting of designing alternative systems, selecting the best system, and writing a systems design report. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 393 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 393 12/02/15 02:32 PM receiving devices and (2) reformatting information for transmission across the Internet. 
Tree network: Also known as a hierarchical network. 
A topology in which each device is connected to a central node, either directly or through one or more other devices. 
The central node is then connected to two or more subordinate nodes that in turn are connected to other subordinate nodes, and so forth, forming a treelike structure. 
Trojan horse: Program that is not a virus but is a carrier of virus(es). 
The most common Trojan horses appear as free computer games, screen savers, or antivirus programs. 
Once downloaded they locate and disable existing virus protection and then deposit the virus. 
Troubleshooting program: A utility program that recognizes and corrects computer-related problems before they become serious. 
Also called diagnostic program. 
Tweet: A twitter message. 
Twisted-pair cable: Cable consisting of pairs of copper wire that are twisted together. 
Twitter: The most popular microblogging site that enables you to add new content from your browser, instant messaging application, or even a mobile phone. 
Two-in-one laptop: Laptop that includes a touch screen and the ability to fold flat like a tablet computer. 
It offers the advantages of a laptop with the convenience of a tablet. 
u Ultra-high-definition television (UHDTV): Delivers a much clearer and more detailed wide-screen picture than regular HDTV. 
Ultrabook: A very portable laptop that is lighter and thinner with a longer battery life than other laptops. 
Ultraportable: See Ultrabook. 
Unicode: A 16-bit code designed to support international languages, like Chinese and Japanese. 
Uniform resource locator (URL): For browsers to connect you to resources on the web, the location or address of the resources must be specified. 
These addresses are called URLs. 
Universal Product Code (UPC): A bar code system that identifies the product to the computer, which has a description and the latest price for the product. 
Universal serial bus (USB): Combines with a PCI bus on the system board to support several external devices without inserting cards for each device. 
USB buses are used to support highspeed scanners, printers, and video-capturing devices. 
Universal serial bus (USB) port: These ports have replaced serial and parallel ports. 
They are faster, and one USB port can be used to connect several devices to the system unit. 
UNIX: An operating system originally developed for midrange computers. 
It is now important because it can run on many of the more powerful personal computers. 
Uplink: To send data to a satellite. 
Uploading: Process of transferring information from the computer the user is operating to a remote computer. 
USB drive: The size of a key chain, these hard drives connect to a computer’s USB port enabling a transfer of files. 
Thermal printer: Printer that uses heat elements to produce images on heat-sensitive paper. 
Third-generation language (3GL): See Procedural language. 
Third-party cookie: A cookie generated by an advertising company that is affiliated with the website you are currently visiting. 
Often also referred to as a tracking cookie. 
Thumb keyboard: Small thumb-operated keyboard for smartphones and other portable devices. 
Designed primarily for texting and connecting to the web. 
Thunderbolt port: A specialty port for high-speed connections to up to seven separate devices connected one to another. 
Tile: Part of the Windows 8 start screen that displays active content. 
Toggle key: These keys turn a feature on or off, like the Caps Lock key. 
Toolbar: Bar located typically below the menu bar containing icons or graphical representations for commonly used commands. 
Top-down analysis method: Method used to identify top-level components of a system, then break these components down into smaller parts for analysis. 
Top-down program design: Used to identify the program’s processing steps, called program modules. 
The program must pass in sequence from one module to the next until the computer has processed all modules. 
Top-level domain (TLD): Last part of an Internet address; identifies the geographic description or organizational identification. 
For example, using www.aol.com, the .com is the toplevel domain code and indicates it is a commercial site. 
See also Domain name. 
Top management: Top-level managers are concerned with long-range (strategic) planning. 
They supervise middle management. 
Topology: The configuration of a network. 
The five principal network topologies are ring, bus, star, tree, and mesh. 
Touch pad: Used to control the pointer by moving and tapping your finger on the surface of a pad. 
Touch screen: Monitor screen allowing actions or commands to be entered by the touch of a finger. 
Tower computer: A desktop system unit placed vertically. 
Tower unit: See Tower computer. 
Track: Closed, concentric ring on a disk on which data is recorded. 
Each track is divided into sections called sectors. 
Tracking cookies: See Third-party cookie. 
Traditional keyboard: Full-sized, rigid, rectangular keyboard that includes function, navigational, and numeric keys. 
Transaction processing system (TPS): System that records day-to-day transactions, such as customer orders, bills, inventory levels, and production output. 
The TPS tracks operations and creates databases. 
Transfer rate: Or transfer speed, is the speed at which modems transmit data, typically measured in bits per second (bps). 
Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP):  TCP/IP is the standard protocol for the Internet. 
The essential features of this protocol involve (1) identifying sending and Final PDF to printer 394 GLOSSARY ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 394 12/02/15 02:32 PM Virus: Hidden instructions that migrate through networks and operating systems and become embedded in different programs. 
They may be designed to destroy data or simply to display messages. 
Voice over IP (VoIP): Transmission of telephone calls over networks. 
See also Telephony. 
Voice recognition system: Using a microphone, sound card, and specialty software, the user can operate a computer and create documents using voice commands. 
Voiceband: Bandwidth of a standard telephone line. 
Also known as low bandwidth. 
VR: See Virtual reality. 
w WAN: See Wide area network. 
Wand reader: Special-purpose handheld device used to read OCR characters. 
Warm boot: Restarting your computer while the computer is already on and the power is not turned off. 
Wearable device: A type of mobile computer such as Apple’s Watch that contains an embedded computer chip. 
Also known as a wearable device. 
Web: Prior to the introduction of the web in 1992, the Internet was all text. 
The web made it possible to provide a multimedia interface that includes graphics, animations, sound, and video. 
Web 1.0: The first generation of the web, which focused on linking existing information. 
Web 2.0: The second generation of the web, which evolved to support more dynamic content creation and social interaction. 
Web 3.0: The third generation of the web, which focuses on computer-generated information requiring less human interaction to locate and to integrate information. 
Web auction: Similar to traditional auctions except that all transactions occur over the web; buyers and sellers seldom meet face to face. 
Web authoring: Creating a website. 
Web authoring program: Word processing program for generating web pages. 
Also called HTML editor or web page editor. 
Widely used web authoring programs include Adobe Dreamweaver and Microsoft FrontPage. 
Web-based e-mail system: An e-mail system that does not require an e-mail program to be installed on your computer. 
Web-based file transfer services: A type of file transfer service that uses a web browser to upload and download files, allowing you to copy files to and from your computer across the Internet. 
Web bug: Program hidden in the HTML code for a web page or e-mail message as a graphical image. 
Web bugs can migrate whenever a user visits a website containing a web bug or opens infected e-mail. 
They collect information on the users and report back to a predefined server. 
Web log: A type of personal website where articles are regularly posted. 
Web page: Browsers interpret HTML documents to display web pages. 
Web page editor: See Web authoring program. 
User: Any individual who uses a computer. 
See also End user. 
User interface: Means by which users interact with application programs and hardware. 
A window is displayed with information for the user to enter or choose, and that is how users communicate with the program. 
Utility: Performs specific tasks related to managing computer resources or files. 
Norton Utility for virus control and system maintenance is a good example of a utility. 
Also known as service programs. 
Utility suite: A program that combines several utilities in one package to improve system performance. 
v Vector illustration: See Vector image. 
Vector image: Graphics file made up of a collection of objects such as lines, rectangles, and ovals. 
Vector images are more flexible than bitmaps because they are defined by mathematical equations so they can be stretched and resized. 
Illustration programs create and manipulate vector graphics. 
Also known as vector illustrations. 
Very high level languages: Task-oriented languages that require little special training on the part of the user. 
VGA (Video Graphic Adapter) port: A type of port that provides a connection to an analog monitor. 
Video editor: Program for editing videos to enhance their quality and appearance. 
Video game design software: Program for organizing and providing guidance for the entire game design process including character development and environmental design. 
Videoconferencing system: Computer system that allows people located at various geographic locations to have in-person meetings. 
Virtual keyboard: Displays an image of a keyboard on a touch-screen device. 
The screen functions as the actual input device, which is why the keyboard is considered virtual. 
Virtual machine: A software implementation of a computer that executes programs like a physical computer. 
Virtual memory: Feature of an operating system that increases the amount of memory available to run programs. 
With large programs, parts are stored on a secondary device like your hard disk. 
Then each part is read in RAM only when needed. 
Virtual private network (VPN): Creates a secure private connection between a remote user and an organization’s internal network. 
Special VPN protocols create the equivalent of a dedicated line between a user’s home or laptop computer and a company server. 
Virtual reality (VR): Interactive sensory equipment (headgear and gloves) allowing users to experience alternative realities generated in 3D by a computer, thus imitating the physical world. 
Virtualization: A process that allows a single physical computer to support multiple operating systems that operate independently. 
Virtualization software: Software that creates virtual machines. 
Final PDF to printer GLOSSARY 395 ole63650_glo_375-395.indd 395 12/02/15 02:32 PM Wireless access point: Or base station. 
The receiver interprets incoming radio frequencies from a wireless LAN and routes communications to the appropriate devices, which could be separate computers, a shared printer, or a modem. 
Wireless charging platform: Recharging device for laptops, tablets, and wearable computers that does not require a connecting cable. 
Wireless communication: The revolutionary way we now communicate on devices like tablets, smartphones, and wearable devices. 
Wireless LAN (WLAN): Uses radio frequencies to connect computers and other devices. 
All communications pass through the network’s centrally located wireless receiver or base station and are routed to the appropriate devices. 
Wireless modem: Typically a small plug-in USB or ExpressCard device that provides very portable high-speed connectivity from virtually anywhere. 
Wireless mouse: See Cordless mouse. 
Wireless network card: Allows computers to be connected without cables. 
Wireless network encryption: Restricts access to authorized users on wireless networks. 
Wireless revolution: A revolution that is expected to dramatically affect the way we communicate and use computer technology. 
Wireless wide area network (WWAN) modem: See Wireless modem. 
Word: The number of bits (such as 16, 32, or 64) that can be accessed at one time by the CPU. 
Word processor: The computer and the program allow you to create, edit, save, and print documents composed of text. 
Worksheet file: Created by electronic spreadsheets to analyze things like budgets and to predict sales. 
Worm: Virus that doesn’t attach itself to programs and databases but fills a computer system with self-replicating information, clogging the system so that its operations are slowed or stopped. 
WPA2 (Wi-Fi Protected Access): A secure encryption protocol. 
Write-once: See Recordable. 
WWW (World Wide Web): Provides a multimedia interface to the Internet. 
Also known as the web. 
WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) editors: Web authoring programs that build a page without requiring direct interaction with the HTML code and then preview the page described by the HTML code. 
z Zombie: A computer infected by a virus, worm, or Trojan horse that allows it to be remotely controlled for malicious purposes. 
Web suffix: Identifies type of organization in a URL. 
Web utilities: Specialized utility programs making the Internet and the web easier and safer. 
Some examples are plug-ins that operate as part of a browser and filters that block access and monitor use of selected websites. 
Webcam: Specialized digital video camera for capturing images and broadcasting to the Internet. 
Webcast: An Internet delivery medium that uses streaming technology, in which audio and video files are continuously downloaded to a computer while the user is listening to and/or viewing the file content. 
Webmail: E-mail that uses a webmail client. 
Webmail client: A special program that runs on an e-mail provider’s computer that supports webmail. 
Webmaster: Develops and maintains websites and web resources. 
Wheel button: Some mice have a wheel button that can be rotated to scroll through information displayed on the monitor. 
Wide area network (WAN): Countrywide and worldwide networks that use microwave relays and satellites to reach users over long distances. 
Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity): Wireless standard also known as 802.11, used to connect computers to each other and to the Internet. 
Wiki: A website that allows people to fill in missing information or correct inaccuracies on it by directly editing the pages. 
Wikipedia: An online encyclopedia, written and edited by anyone who wants to contribute. 
WiMax (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access): Technology that extends Wi-Fi networks to operate over greater distances. 
Window: A rectangular area containing a document or message. 
Windows: An operating environment extending the capability of DOS. 
Windows 8: OS from 2012 that is designed to better integrate Microsoft’s desktop OS with its mobile OS. 
It provides support for gestures, cloud integration, and apps. 
Windows Mobile 10: A mobile operating system introduced in 2015 to replace Windows 8. 
It is able to run many powerful programs designed for desktop and laptop computers. 
Windows 10: OS from 2015 that merged Windows’ desktop and mobile operating systems. 
It introduced Cortana, a digital assistant that can accept commands through text or speech. 
Windows Phone 8: Introduced in 2012 by Microsoft to support a variety of mobile devices including smartphones. 
It has the ability to run many powerful programs designed for desktop and laptop computers. 
Windows RT: A version of Windows 8 designed to run with tablets using a particular microprocessor from ARM. 
Final PDF to printer 396 ole63650_idx_396-408.indd 396 12/08/15 12:44 PM Appszoo